---
tags:
- literature
date: 2010-06-16T00:00:00Z
tags:
- henrik-ibsen
- james-joyce
- writer-as-artist
title: Joyce to Ibsen, 1901
url: /2010/06/16/joyce-to-ibsen-1901/
---

James Joyce wrote to Henrik Ibsen when Joyce was nineteen years old and Ibsen in his seventies and at the end of his career. Joyce had managed to publish a review —his very first formal publication — of Ibsen's play <em>When We Dead Awaken</em> a year earlier and, to his great surprise, Ibsen responded: "I have read or rather spelled out a review in <em>The Fortnightly Review</em> by Mr James Joyce which is very benevolent and for which I should greatly like to thank the author if only I had sufficient knowledge of the language." This began a three year correspondence between the two.

According to Joyce's biographer Richard Ellmann, Ibsen's response "fell upon him like a benison at the beginning of his career. He had entered the world of literature under the best auspices in that world...Before Ibsen's letter Joyce was an Irishman; after it he was a European."

At this time Joyce had been writing, but it was well before he published any of his own work of fiction, poetry or drama. Ibsen's influence is clear in <em>Portrait</em>, yet in an earlier essay "Drama and Life" and the following letter it appears that Ibsen's influence is as an artist as well. Understanding Joyce's view of himself as an "artist" is critical to reading his work.

"...the artist forgoes his very self and stands a mediator in awful truth before the veiled face of God."

Joyce translated his own words from English to Norwegian. Here is the letter:
<blockquote>To Henrik Ibsen
March 1901

<em>8 Royal Terrace, Fairfield, Dublin </em>

Honoured Sir: I write to you to give you greeting on your seventy-third birthday and to join my voice to those of your well-wishers in all lands. You may remember that shortly after the publication of your latest play, <em>When We Dead Awaken</em>, an appreciation of it appeared in one of the English Reviews — <em>The Fortnightly Review</em> — over my name. I know that you have seen it because some short time afterwards Mr William Archer wrote to me and told me that in a letter he had had from you some days before, you had written, 'I have read or rather spelled out a review in <em>The Fortnightly Review</em> by Mr James Joyce which is very benevolent and for which I should greatly like to thank the author if only I had sufficient knowledge of the language.' (My own knowledge of your language is not, as you see, great but I trust you will be able to decipher my meaning.) I can hardly tell you how moved I was by your message. I am a young, very young man, and perhaps the telling of such tricks of the nerves will make you smile. But I am sure if you go back along your own life to the time when you were an undergraduate at the University as I am, and if you think what it would have meant to you to have earned a word from one who held as high a place in your esteem as you hold in mine, you will understand my feeling. One thing only I regret, namely, that an immature and hasty article should have met your eye rather than something better and worthier of your praise. There may not have been any wilful stupidity in it, but truly I can say no more. It may annoy to you to have your works at the mercy of striplings but I am sure you would prefer hotheadedness to nerveless and 'cultured' paradoxes.

What shall I say more? I have sounded your name defiantly through the college where it was either unknown of known faintly and darkly. I have claimed for you your rightful place in the history of drama. I have shown what, as it seemed to me, was your highest excellence — your lofty impersonal power. Your minor claims — your satire, your technique and orchestral harmony — these, too, I advanced. Do not think me a hero-worshipper — I am not so. And when I spoke of you in debating societies and so forth, I enforced attention by no futile ranting.

But we always keep the dearest things to ourselves. I did not tell them what bound me closest to you. I did not say how what I could discern dimly of your life was my pride to see, how your battles inspired me — not the obvious material battles but those that were fought and won behind your forehead, how your wilful resolution to wrest the secret from life gave me heart and how in your absolute indifference to public canons of art, friends and shibboleths you walked in the light of your inward heroism. And this is what I write to you of now. Your work on earth draws to a close and you are near the silence. It is growing dark for you. Many write of such things, but they do not know. You have only opened the way — though you have gone as far as you could upon it — to the end of 'John Gabriel Borkman' and its spiritual truth — but your last play stands, I take it, apart. But I am sure that higher and holier enlightenment lies — onward.

As one of the young generation for whom you have spoken I give you greeting — not humbly, because I am obscure and you in the glare, not sadly, because you are an old man and I am a young man, not presumptuously nor sentimentally — but joyfully, with hope and with love, I give you greeting.</blockquote>
