---
title: Seeking Performance from your website? Skip the database
subtitle: Introduction to static site generators and a new paradigm for building websites
layout: page
tags: [Static Site Generators]
---
_Warning: This article is written with technically minded non-technologists in mind. Others may be frustrated._

### The Brief History
In 2012 the developers for the Obama re-election campaign moved from an ExpressionEngine-based website to serving static HTML pages generated by open source software called [Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com/).[^1] The success of that website, which was a model of performance and stability even with over 81 million page views, has set a movement afoot for web developers to utilize a more straightforward and less bloated technology stack than had become the norm over the past decade. 

Static site generators, like the one used by the Obama campaign, essentially marry text documents with layout templates to generate HTML pages, which are only then pushed to the server. There is no content management system and no database and the result was in incredibly fast, lightweight website.

### The Post-CMS World

Ben Balter, Github Gov 2.0 Evangelist and former Presidential Innovation Fellow, calls this the “Post-CMS” world[^5], and I believe he's right. Solutions such as Jekyll or other static site generators (there are many) are not content management systems because they only process files (i.e.convert documents and templates into HTML pages). However, it's only the database and system of application layers that is missing. Developers and website owners are beginning to use a variety of loosely connected tools that are taking the place of formerly integrated content management systems, choosing only the bits they need and only the ones that work best for their needs.

Ask any audiophile about their stereo system and you likely won't find just a box that plays the radio and cds or iPods, but a set of amplifiers, tuners and other components, each doing what it does best. [[[[[While much of the world is oblivious to the better quality of these collections]]]]

[Docpad](http://docpad.org/) is an excellent embodiment of this paradigm, billing itself as a "next generation" web architecture where one can choose pretty much any feature they need, whether that be a database, a particular templating system or editor, or other function to suit their needs. No assumptions and nothing you don't need. 

This “post-CMS” paradigm relies on the interoperability of any number of bits of software: Commenting systems, member management, document and file management, security, templating, reporting; in short, all the bits and pieces that used to be a part of a single bloated content management system (typically dictated by the makers of that system) are now, conceivably, there for the picking when needed; each piece focused on doing that one job well. 

One example of this is commenting systems. For a long time "native" [to the CMS] commenting systems were not great. Even when they got better they were not as good as those provided by companies that recognized this and built software focused just on making the comment system great. Now commenting by [DISQUS](http://disqus.com/) and others appear to be far more prevalant than native systems of the past. Each commenting system has its own feature set and qualities. 

While I don't think CMS driven sites are going to go away, I think the trend toward bringing an application development mindset to the world of building websites will have a postive effect on CMS creators and perhaps even CMSs as we know them will merely be expert collections of various functionalities, rather than in-house creations as they are today.

### The Problem
While there are many factors that may hurt a website's performance, many popular content management systems are gas guzzlers clogging the roadways of the internet. The heart of a "traditional" CMS driven website is a SQL database where all the site's content and settings are organized into tables with rows and columns, something like a very complicated spreadsheet. Each CMS has its own scheme of organizing this information based on the perceived needs of its users and the system's goals. On top of the database there is an application layer that converts the data into pages, route those pages into web addresses to serve to end users, and manages various user functions like inputing content to the database through a WYSIWYG editor (whether or not we need all of those functions). This process is time consuming, yet is typically done only at the point that a reader visits a web page. Even measured in miliseconds, processing time is detrimental to the user's experience, particularly on today's mobile devices.[^2] Many websites cache (save pre-rendered web pages in memory) to speed up the process, though that merely adds a another layer of complexity rather than solve the original problem.[^4] 

SQL databases are not only potential sources for performance bottlenecks but are targets for hacking. What's more, they can be difficult to maintain in a version control system, and act as a barrier--when content is organized around them--to moving content from one system to another. Even free open source systems may come at a great cost of maintenance and hosting at scale as well as reliance on a variety of add-on developers that becomes expensive over time.

This is not to suggest that database driven websites are inherently bad in all cases, but for a vast number of independent websites a database driven content management system may very well be overkill. As websites get fatter and slower[^3] it becomes ever more important to question how they are built and look for new efficiencies. While static websites aren't a panacea, they very well may be a gateway toward a new way of thinking.




### Documents and Data
Content management for static site generator is nothing more than a set of files in folders, much like what we are all used to using on a day-to-day basis. We're only really lacking an organizing principle and its easy enough to display content in a table, so there's little reason why the lack of a database has to mean a lack of functionality for users.

In the real world we organize our little bits of data into spreadsheets and our text in documents, yet in the world of CMS driven websites we lump all of our documents as though they were bits of data into spreadsheet-like rows, which in turn creates a separation between us and our content.

I've worked with writers and editors over the years to help them get accustomed to the act of writing in Word (very sticky Word!) to copying their work into one or more little boxes with a new set of formatting buttons so each piece can be injected into a database. Some get it, many don't and everyone seems relatively uncomfortable with it. 


This is what a document might look like in a static site:



\- \- \-  
title: Title  
category: Category  
layout: article  
date: November 10, 2013  
author: authorname  
\- \- \-  
content goes here


---
This is a text document that can be moved or shared with ease. In a database driven website the information above may be separated into as many as three or four different tables. While a highly organized database isn't inherently wrong, document-based templating systems maintain the connection between the creator of the content and the resulting document.


### Cost Effectiveness & Faster Iterations

Static sites don't require as complex web server setups so are much cheaper to host. In fact, depending on the circumstances, they can be hosted for free on [Github's Pages](http://pages.github.com/) service, which tightly ties their version control with the site's hosting.

Another example of a website that was originally planned to be on a commercial CMS then moved to static is the information portal of healthcare.gov (not the problematic back-end application). This website has over a thousand pages organized for various users and was built with the same tools as the Obama campaign website. As a result of the move from a CMS to static, the site's server requirements went from 32 servers down to one.[^5]

The lack of rigidity in developing sites without a CMS make changes much faster to put into effect. The ease of version control also makes it such that a developer or developers anywhere can contribute to the site's development and a site can easily be "forked," that is copied for use on another site, in a matter of minutes. The entire website can be treated as an open source project (it can also be kept private in this set up).

### The Future


I also believe that the way we think about our content will change. 



### Summary

The primary benefits of using static sites generators are:

- performance
- stability
- cost effectiveness
- faster iterations
- relative simplicity
- replicability


---


[^1]: <http://kylerush.net/blog/meet-the-obama-campaigns-250-million-fundraising-platform/>

[^2]: <https://econsultancy.com/blog/63962-2014-the-mobile-seo-timebomb>

[^3]: <http://www.webperformancetoday.com/2014/02/25/the-great-web-slowdown-infographic/>

[^4]: <http://developmentseed.org/blog/2012/07/27/build-cms-free-websites/>

[^5]: <http://ben.balter.com/2012/10/01/welcome-to-the-post-cms-world/>

[^6]: <http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2013/06/healthcaregov-code-developed-by-the-people-and-for-the-people-released-back-to-the-people/277295/>

