---
layout: post
title: 'Your Face Tomorrow: Dance and Dream, by Javier Marias'
categories: ['Book Review']
---
<p> How to describe <em>Your Face Tomorrow</em>? Its title tells us nothing about what happens in the book and the subtitles of the individual volumes (it&#8217;s a three volume novel, two of which have so far been translated into English and published by New Directions), &#8220;Fever and Spear&#8221; and &#8220;Dance and Dream&#8221; are not quite motifs but something like mental markers, like, perhaps, the titles given to Abstract impressionist paintings. While there is action and even a story in <em>Your Face Tomorrow</em> I think it would be unfair to describe this novel that way. The story follows Jack Deza, an urbane Spaniard in England whose wife has left him, as he gets a job in the British Secret Service judging the truthfulness (loosely termed) of the unwitting diplomats, spies and other characters who pass through the agency&#8217;s halls. While that story certainly has potential, I would mislead you if I told you that&#8217;s what the book is about. Everything that happens in a Mar&iacute;as novel is a colorful backdrop or even pretext for ruminating on the subject Jack or his creator are thinking about. And that&#8217;s closer to the point than the story in and of itself. </p>
<p>Javier Mar&iacute;as&#8217;s  extravagantly digressive writing ranges from sensuous to dialectical and meditative, but occasionally banal to the point of distraction. Like Lauren Hutton&#8217;s gapped teeth this can be endearing rather than a flaw that would make lesser writers intolerable, but for a writer who can easily stretch a five minute event through 70 or 80 pages or a sentence to Proustian proportions, he seems willing to risk breaking the rhythm so crucial to his style for the sake of grounding his characters with an awkward, sometimes puzzling naturalistic whimsy. </p>
<p>In <em>Dance and Dream</em>, volume two of the <em>Your Face Tomorrow</em> trilogy, Deza is ordered by his mysterious quasi-secret agent boss Tupra to search the toilets for a eurotrash diplomat and a dignitary&#8217;s wife who&#8217;ve gone astray together in a London nightclub. This bathroom scene &#8211; a great deal of this second volume takes place in the toilet, although it might be more accurate to say it takes place inside Deza&#8217;s mind &#8211; begins on page 89 and ends nearly 70 pages later with Deza&#8217;s thoughts just walking out the door of the toilet starting from page 121. </p>
<p>The scene encompasses not only his search of the nightclub&#8217;s restrooms but ruminations on themes began in the novel&#8217;s first volume <em>Fever and Spear</em> such as meditations on violence and the Spanish Civil War, &#8211; Deza&#8217;s father survived the war from the losing side but not without a great deal of suffering &#8211; remorse over estrangement from his wife who is still in Spain, and the tiny detail of a drop of blood, which occupies a central point in volume one and reappears in a different although related context here. The drop of blood takes on many symbolic possibilities but at the least it creates a bond between volume one and two, endowing the primary setting of both books with a physical puzzlement and the novelistic possibilities of questioning its source.</p>
<p>This is why we read Mar&iacute;as, for his thoughts keyed by the events at hand, events that seem inconsequential for their only purpose is to provoke Deza, to spur his brooding, to lead us through his history or the history of his country, to watch from afar the way we humans treat one another, how we behave when we&#8217;re alone. Besides these larger themes, Deza&#8217;s mind dips into country song lyrics, women&#8217;s legs &#8211; &#8220;So there it was, that line of legs&#8221; &#8211; and naturally, the state of the toilets. In a later scene in the restrooms for the disabled, he muses:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>&#8220;equally generous was the excellent lighting, intended, I assumed, to avoid the possibility of any stumbles, everything was new and spotless, gleaming and even welcoming, without any of the sordid elements so frequent in public toilets. It was admirable that people should show such respect for the disabled of Britain, that they did not cheerfully invade it and soil and besmirch it, as is the norm among men and optional among women.&#8221; </p>
</blockquote>
<p>This strikes me as vaguely naive or even silly, yet a few moments later, more or less, banality veers into a nearly absurd act of violence. Here Mar&iacute;as revels in the detail of the moment:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>&#8220;I saw the look on his face, the look of someone who thinks or knows he is dead; but since he was still alive, the image was one of infinite fear and struggle, mental struggle, perhaps of desire&#8217; of childish, undisguised terror, his mouth must have dried instantly, as instantly as his face turned deathly pale, just as if someone had give his face a quick lick of grey or off-white or queasy-colored paint, or had thrown flour over him or perhaps talcum powder, it was rather like when swift clouds cast a shadow over the fields and a shudder runs through the flocks below, or like the hand that spreads the plague or closes the eyes of the deceased.&#8221;</p>
</blockquote>
<p>I read in a recent <a href="http://theparisreview.com/viewinterview.php/prmMID/5680">Paris Review</a> interview that Mar&iacute;as writes as he goes, intensively focusing on one section at a time, never looking back on a passage. It&#8217;s easy to muse that the inconsistencies, if you could call them that, in his writing might be due to a lack of coffee one day, or too much, or a Laurel and Hardy movie on television, maybe a song on the radio, a random phone call from a friend. The fact that he pulls this off, at least in my view,  says a lot about Mar&iacute;as. He is not a writer for everyone, indeed I&#8217;d call him something of an intellectual elitist, both in tone and content, but to unflinchingly transcend story as he does puts him in a rare category of writer.</p>
<p>This is part one of a multi-part post: Next: Mar&iacute;as and Menstruation</p>
<p>Buy <em>Your Face Tomorrow: Vol.2 Dance and Dream</em> at <a href="http://www.betterworld.com/Your-Face-Tomorrow-Volume-Two-id-081121656X.aspx">BetterWorld Books</a> and your purchase will help support BetterWorld&#8217;s literacy partners.</p>

