---
layout: page
title: 'Jonathan Baumbach Recommends “Spanking the Maid”'
categories: ['culture']
---
<p>Let me walk out on the stage by saying that surprise is a literary touchstone for me. That said, when one looks to be surprised by a work of fiction, it is all the more difficult to be caught out. To hope to be surprised, to look forward expectantly to being taken by surprise, is more than likely to cancel out the possibility. And what do I mean after all by surprise here? Everything original in the best sense is surprising in its way, which is to say that the great books continue to surprise even though our prior experience with them lets us think (gives us that jading illusion) that we know what&#8217;s coming next. Once we are familiar with the twists of a surprising plot, unless we have conveniently faulty memories, we can never be surprised by them again. The books I&#8217;ve admired, and continue to admire, have other ways of engendering surprise.</p>
<p>A favorite quote of mine from the French filmmaker Robert Bresson exhorts the artist &#8220;to bring together things that had not been brought together before and had not been predisposed to be so.&#8221; That&#8217;s the kind of surprise I believe I&#8217;m talking about&mdash;the surprise of flying in the face of the received rules. The writer among my contemporaries, whom I find the most surprising and therefore the most admirable, is Robert Coover, a household name only in the most enlightened households. Virtually all of Coover&#8217;s fictions tend to have the quality of surprise that the Bresson quote refers to, which is at least one determinant of their&#8217; pleasure for me. If I have to choose a single book of Coover&#8217;s to recommend, and that&#8217;s what I&#8217;m committed to doing, I would choose the seemingly modest novella, the playful, mock-pornographic, &#8220;Spanking the Maid&#8221;&mdash;a book I&#8217;ve presented to my classes at Brooklyn College over and over again&#8212;because (and why not?) the choice is itself a surprise.</p>

