---
layout: post
title: 'History Lessons'
categories: ['Culture at Large']
---
If, like me, you sat horrified as Colin Powell so obviously lied to the world about WMDs in Iraq back in 2003, you knew there was a heavy dose of politics at work there. Making explicit what we more or less understood, Fulton Armstrong, a former U.S. Intelligence Officer, writes, in a letter to the editor of <em><a href="http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2010/aug/19/cia-and-wmds-damning-evidence/?pagination=false">The New York Review of Books</a></em>:
<blockquote>When we on the National Intelligence Council finally got a full read of the National Intelligence Estimate on WMDs, after its publication, a couple of us expressed grave reservations about the fatally weak evidence and the obsessively one-sided interpretation of what shreds of information it contained. (We were not told at the time that “Curveball” was a solitary source of obviously questionable credentials, nor that contradictory evidence was actually suppressed from the intelligence collection and dissemination process.) One colleague said it was clearly a paper written to provide a rationale for a predetermined policy decision to go to war. When I challenged the lack of evidence and the lack of alternative explanations, including forcing the questions raised by the INR into a lowly footnote, one of the WMD-promoting NIOs leaned forward and bellowed: “Who are you to question this paper? Even <em>The Washington Post</em> and <em>The New York Times</em> agree with us.” The irony was complete: previously respected reporters, spoon-fed by Bush administration officials, were now being used to provide cover for the NIOs’ similar compromise in accepting the administration’s view.</blockquote>
Thomas Powers, who wrote the <a href="http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2010/may/27/how-they-got-their-bloody-way/">article</a> (about a book by Robert Jervis on the topic), replies, beginning:
<blockquote>Fulton Armstrong’s important letter states as fact something Americans have been resisting for sixty years—that presidents tell the CIA not only what to do, but what to say. By Americans I do not mean only ordinary citizens puzzling over intelligence flaps every few years, but observers thought to be sophisticated, like professors, senators of long experience, foreign policy professionals, and reporters for serious newspapers. Armstrong describes the reality about as plainly as I have ever seen it done in his letter explaining the source of error in the CIA’s insistently wrong estimate of the progress of Saddam Hussein’s Iraq in its purported effort to develop weapons of mass destruction.</blockquote>
One takeaway from this exchange (upon reading it in its entirety ) is that not much has changed in terms of the underlying problems. Whenever I begin to think I should be less cynical about politics and the media, I come across something like this. Cynicism never goes out of style.
<h4>Read the rest of the letter at <em><a href="http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2010/aug/19/cia-and-wmds-damning-evidence/?pagination=false">The New York Review of Books</a></em>.</h4>
